Rewrite of README content focused on end-user needs (#124)
GoogleCloudPlatform/openmrs-fhir-analytics: README.md

There is also a query module built on top of the generated data warehouse.

## Prerequisites

-   An [OpenMRS](https://openmrs.org) instance with the latest version of the
    [FHIR2 Module](https://addons.openmrs.org/show/org.openmrs.module.openmrs-fhir2-module)
    installed.
    -   There is a [OpenMRS Reference Application](#run-openmrs-using-docker)
        image with these prerequisites and demo data you can use to try things
        out.
-   A target output for the data. Supported options are Apache Parquet files
    (not supported by Atom Feed mode), FHIR API resources, and
    [Google Cloud Platform FHIR stores](https://cloud.google.com/healthcare/docs/how-tos/fhir).
    -   You can use our [HAPI FHIR server](#run-hapi-fhir-server-using-docker)
        image for testing FHIR API targets.
    -   [Learn how to create a compatible GCP FHIR store](#create-a-google-cloud-fhir-store-and-bigquery-dataset).

### Installing the FHIR2 Module

**To install via web**: Log in to OpenMRS as an administrator, go to **System
Administration > Manage Modules > Search from Addons**, search for the `FHIR2`

> module, and install. Make sure to install the FHIR2 module, not FHIR.

Reviewer: Also in the above line: `FHIR2` -> `fhir2` because that is how the module is named.
```suggestion
module, and install. Make sure to install the `fhir2` module, not `fhir`.
```

**To install via .omod file**: Go to
[FHIR2 Module](https://addons.openmrs.org/show/org.openmrs.module.openmrs-fhir2-module)
and download the .omod file. Go to **Advanced Administration > Module
Properties** and find the modules folder. Move the .omod file to the modules
folder then restart OpenMRS.

[Learn more about OpenMRS modules](https://guide.openmrs.org/en/Configuration/customizing-openmrs-with-plug-in-modules.html).

## Setup

1.  [Install the FHIR2 Module](#installing-the-fhir2-module) if necessary.
2.  [Clone](https://docs.github.com/en/github/creating-cloning-and-archiving-repositories/cloning-a-repository)
    the
    [OpenMRS FHIR Analytics](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/openmrs-fhir-analytics)
    project to your machine.

> 3.  Set the `utils` directory to world-readable: `chmod -r 755 ./utils`.

Reviewer: I think this will make the content of `utils/` executable too which is not a great. Only `utils` and `utils/dbdump` need to be made executable (and everything world-readable).

Author: I can't find a particularly elegant way to set directories to 755 but files to 644. The best I found was this two-liner.

```
find ./utils -type d -exec chmod 755 {} \;
find ./utils -type f -exec chmod 644 {} \;
```

Do you have a better command?

Reviewer: This approach is okay but the second command will remove the execute bit from those that have it. Another approach is to be more specific, e.g.,:
```
$ chmod a+rx ./utils ./utils/dbdump
$ chmod -R a+r ./utils
```

4.  Build binaries with `mvn clean install`.

## Common Parameters

Although each mode of transfer uses a different binary, they use some common
parameters which are documented here.

-   `openmrsServerUrl` - The base URL of the source OpenMRS instance (e.g.,
    `http://localhost:8099/openmrs`).

> -   `openmrsUserName` - The HTTP Basic Auth username to access the OpenMRS APIs.

Reviewer: The list here is great; can you also add the default values of this?
```suggestion
-   `openmrsUserName` - The HTTP Basic Auth username to access the OpenMRS APIs (default: `admin`).
```

-   `openmrsPassword` - The HTTP Basic Auth password to access the OpenMRS APIs.
-   `fhirSinkPath` - A base URL to a target FHIR server, or the relative path of
    a GCP FHIR store, e.g. `http://localhost:8098/fhir` for a FHIR server or
    `projects/PROJECT/locations/LOCATION/datasets/DATASET/fhirStores/FHIR-STORE-NAME`
    for a GCP FHIR store.
-   `sinkUserName` - The HTTP Basic Auth username to access the FHIR sink.
-   `sinkPassword` - The HTTP Basic Auth password to access the FHIR sink.

> -   `fileParquetPath` - A relative file path to write Parquet files to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `fileParquetPath` - The file path to write Parquet files to, e.g., `./tmp/parquet/`
```

The next sections describe parameters specific to Batch mode. See
[Common Parameters](#common-parameters) for information about the other
parameters.

### Batch mode using FHIR Search

To start Batch Mode using FHIR Search, run:

```
$ java -cp batch/target/fhir-batch-etl-bundled-0.1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar \
    org.openmrs.analytics.FhirEtl \
    --openmrsServerUrl=http://localhost:8099/openmrs \
    --openmrsUserName=admin --openmrsPassword=Admin123 \
    --fhirSinkPath=http://localhost:8098/fhir \
    --sinkUserName=hapi --sinkPassword=hapi \
    --fileParquetPath=tmp/TEST/ \
    --searchList=Patient,Encounter,Observation --batchSize=20
```

Parameters:

-   `searchList` - A comma-separated list of
    [FHIR Search](https://www.hl7.org/fhir/search.html) URLs. For example,
    `Patient?given=Susan` will extract only Patient resources that meet the
    `given=Susan` criteria.
-   `batchSize` - The number of resources to fetch in each API call.
    Default: 100.

### Batch mode using JDBC

To start Batch Mode using JDBC, run:

```
$ java -cp batch/target/fhir-batch-etl-bundled-0.1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar \
    org.openmrs.analytics.FhirEtl \
    --openmrsServerUrl=http://localhost:8099/openmrs \

>     --openmrsUserName=admin --openmrsPassword=Admin123 \

Reviewer: Suggestion: From this second command forward, drop the arguments with the default value and add a note upfront that we have not repeated the arguments with default values.

Author: I'm a little torn - I understand it's very repetitive, but the default values are not actually useful for end users, so listing them is an explicit reminder to swap in their own values.

    --fhirSinkPath=http://localhost:8098/fhir \
    --sinkUserName=hapi --sinkPassword=hapi \
    --fileParquetPath=tmp/TEST/ \
    --jdbcModeEnabled=true --jdbcUrl=jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/openmrs \
    --dbUser=root --dbPassword=debezium --jdbcMaxPoolSize=50 \
    --jdbcDriverClass=com.mysql.cj.jdbc.Driver

```

> -   `jdbcModeEnabled` - If true, uses JDBC mode. Default: false

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parameters:
- `jdbcModeEnabled` - If true, uses JDBC mode. Default: false
```

-   `jdbcUrl` - The

>     [JDBC database connection URL](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/jdbc/basics/connecting.html#db_connection_url).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [JDBC database connection URL](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/jdbc/basics/connecting.html#db_connection_url)
```

>     for the OpenMRS MySQL database. Default: jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/openmrs

Reviewer: I would suggest to use "``" for all default values.
```suggestion
    for the OpenMRS MySQL database. Default: `jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/openmrs`
```

    for the OpenMRS MySQL database. Default:
    `jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/openmrs`
-   `dbUser` - The name of a user that has access to the database. Default:
    `root`
-   `dbPassword` - The password of `dbUser`. Default: `debezium`
-   `jdbcMaxPoolSize` - The maximum number of database connections. Default:
    `50`
-   `jdbcDriverClass` - The fully qualified class name of the JDBC driver. This
    generally should not be changed. Default: `com.mysql.cj.jdbc.Driver`

## Streaming mode (Debezium)

The Debezium-based streaming mode provides real-time downstream consumption of
incremental updates, even for operations that were performed outside the OpenMRS
API, e.g., data cleaning, module operations, and data syncing/migration. It
captures incremental updates from the MySQL database binlog then streams both
FHIR and non-FHIR data for downstream consumption. It is not based on Hibernate
Interceptor or Event Module; therefore, all events are captured from day 0 and
can be used independently without the need for a batch pipeline. It also
tolerates failures like application restarts or crashes, as the pipeline will
resume from the last processed offset.

### Getting Started

> 1.  Complete the Debezium

Author: If I understand correctly these steps need to be done to the actual OpenMRS MySQL database, so you couldn't use Docker in real use. Maybe I'm missing a live use case for Docker? Or do you mean for trial purposes?

> 1.  Complete the Debezium

Reviewer: Yes I meant for trial/testing. I mean, you should keep what you have described here but also just add a reference to the docker section to point out that the provided images take care of these.

> 1.  Complete the Debezium

Author: done

    [MySQL Setup](https://debezium.io/documentation/reference/1.4/connectors/mysql.html#setting-up-mysql).
    At a minimum,
    [create a user](https://debezium.io/documentation/reference/1.4/connectors/mysql.html#mysql-creating-user)
    and
    [enable the binlog](https://debezium.io/documentation/reference/1.4/connectors/mysql.html#enable-mysql-binlog).
2.  Edit `./utils/dbz_event_to_fhir_config.json`. Find the
    `debeziumConfigurations` section at the top of the file and edit the values
    to match your environment. See the documentation on
    [Debezium MySQL Connector properties](https://debezium.io/documentation/reference/connectors/mysql.html#mysql-property-name)
    for more information.
3.  Build binaries with `mvn clean install`.
4.  Run the pipeline:

    ```shell
    $ mvn compile exec:java -pl streaming-binlog \
        -Dexec.args="--openmrsServerUrl=http://localhost:8099/openmrs \
        --openmrsUserName=admin --openmrsPassword=Admin123 \
        --fhirSinkPath=http://localhost:8098/fhir \
        --sinkUserName=hapi --sinkPassword=hapi \
        --fileParquetPath=tmp/TEST/ \
        --fhirDebeziumEventConfigPath=./utils/dbz_event_to_fhir_config.json \

>         --openmrsfhirBaseEndpoint=/ws/fhir2/R4"

Author: ack - will document as is and create the issue

    ```

The next sections describe parameters specific to Debezium Streaming mode. See
[Common Parameters](#common-parameters) for information about the other
parameters.

Parameters:

-   `fhirDebeziumConfigPath` - The path to the configuration file containing
    MySQL parameters and FHIR mappings. This generally should not be changed.
    Default: `utils/dbz_event_to_fhir_config.json`
-   `openmrsfhirBaseEndpoint` - The OpenMRS server base path for its FHIR API
    endpoints. Using all default values, you would find Patient resources at
    `http://localhost:8099/openmrs/ws/fhir2/R4/Patient`. This generally should
    not be changed. Default: `/ws/fhir2/R4`

### Common questions

*   **Will this pipeline include historical data recorded before the `mysql
    binlog` was enabled?** Yes. By default, the pipeline takes a snapshot of the
    entire database and will include all historical data.

*   **How do I stop Debezium from taking a snapshot of the entire database?**

>     Set `snapshotMode` to `schema_only` i.e, `--snapshotMode=schema_only`. Other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Set `snapshotMode` in the config file to `schema_only` i.e, `--snapshotMode=schema_only`. Other
```

    options include: `when_needed`, `schema_only`, `initial` (default), `never`,
    e.t.c. See the
    [`debezium documentation`](https://camel.apache.org/components/latest/debezium-mysql-component.html)
    for more details.

> ### Dev. tip

Author: Will move content in separate PR

When working on a feature in the Debezium based pipeline, you can replay old
binlog updates by setting the system properties `database.offsetStorage` and
`database.databaseHistory` to an old version of the history. In other words, you
can start from history/offset pair A, add some events in OpenMRS (e.g., add an
Observation) to create some updates in the binlog. Now if you keep a copy of
original version of A (before the changes) you can reuse it in future runs to
replay the new events with no more interactions with OpenMRS.

> ## Streaming mode (Atom Feed)

Author: Will address in follow-up PR.

The Atom Feed-based streaming client requires a MySQL database to store failed
events and progress markers.

If you don't have an available MySQL service, you can start one up using Docker:

```shell
$ docker run --name=atomfeed-db -d mysql/mysql-server:latest \
  -p 127.0.0.1:3306:3306 -e "MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=root" \
  -e "MYSQL_USER=fhir" -e "MYSQL_PASSWORD=fhiranalytics"
```

This will create the MySQL user `fhir` with password `fhiranalytics` which is
used in the code and examples. Adjust these values as necessary.

Next, create the necessary database and tables. From your MySQL server run:

```shell
mysql --user=fhir --password=fhiranalytics < utils/dbdump/atomfeed_db_sql
```

The default database name is `atomfeed_client`. You can change this by editing
[`utils/dbdump/atomfeed_db_sql`](utils/dbdump/atomfeed_db_sql).

Finally, update
[`src/main/resources/hibernate.default.properties`](src/main/resources/hibernate.default.properties)
with any customizations you've made. Pay extra attention to
`hibernate.connection.url`, `hibernate.connection.username`, and
`hibernate.connection.password`.

### Compile and run

From the root of your git repo, compile the client:

```

> mvn clean -B install -DskipTests -pl streaming-atomfeed -am

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mvn clean install -pl streaming-atomfeed -am
```

```

See [Common Parameters](#common-parameters) for information about the
parameters.

To test your changes, create a new patient (or observation) in OpenMRS and check
that a corresponding Patient (or Observation) FHIR resource is created in the
GCP FHIR store and corresponding rows added to the BigQuery tables.

## Using Docker compose

You can run the entire pipeline using Docker containers by following these
instructions.

### Run OpenMRS using Docker

```
$ docker-compose -f openmrs-compose.yaml up # change ports appropriately (optional)
```

Once running you can access OpenMRS at <http://localhost:8099/openmrs/> using
username "admin" and password "Admin123". The Docker image includes the required
FHIR2 module and demo data.

If `docker-compose` fails, you may need to adjust file permissions.

```
$ docker-compose -f openmrs-compose.yaml down -v
$ chmod -R 755 ./utils
$ docker-compose -f openmrs-compose.yaml up
```

In order to see the demo data in OpenMRS you must rebuild the search index. In
OpenMRS go to **Home > System Administration > Advanced Administration**. Under
**Maintenance** go to **Search Index** then **Rebuild Search Index**.

> ### Run HAPI FHIR server using Docker

Reviewer: Please add a note that this is only needed if someone needs to test the "send to FHIR server" scenario, i.e., just to generate the data warehouse (i.e., the Parquet files) this is not needed.

```

> $ docker-compose -f sink-compose.yml up # change ports appropriately (optional)

Reviewer: You can remove the comment as the following note is enough.

```

You can access the FHIR server at <http://localhost:8098/fhir/>. Edit
`sink-compose.yml` to change the default port.

> ### Configure ./docker-compose.yaml

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
### Configure docker-compose.yaml
```

Parameters (e.g port/url ) have been configured to point to
http://localhost:8099/openmrs/

Remember to appropriately change other parameters such as source url, sink path,
and any required authentication information.

### Run a Transfer Pipeline

#### Batch Pipeline

```
$ mvn clean install
$ docker-compose up --build batch
```

##### Streaming Pipeline (Debezium)

```
$ mvn clean install
$ docker-compose up --build streaming-binlog
```

##### Streaming Pipeline (Atomfeed)

```

>  $ mvn clean -B install -DskipTests -pl streaming-atomfeed -am

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 $ mvn clean install -pl streaming-atomfeed -am
```

-   `searchList` - A comma-separated list of
    [FHIR Search](https://www.hl7.org/fhir/search.html) URLs. For example,
    `Patient?given=Susan` will extract only Patient resources that meet the
    `given=Susan` criteria. Default: `Patient,Encounter,Observation`
-   `batchSize` - The number of resources to fetch in each API call.
    Default: `100`

> -   `serverFhirEndpoint` - The OpenMRS server base path for its FHIR API

Author: ack

[nbextensions](https://jupyter-contrib-nbextensions.readthedocs.io/en/latest/install.html).

A sample notebook is provided at [`dwh/test_spark.ipynb`](dwh/test_spark.ipynb)

> which uses `matplotlib` too, so to run this you need to install it too: `(venv)

Reviewer: Is there a particular reason that you preferred the inline version of the command to the original ``` version?

Author: Not intended, I think it was an issue with the auto-formatter. I've changed it back.

$ pip3 install matplotlib` At the end of this notebook, we wrap up the tests
into reusable functions that we can use outside the Jupyter environment e.g.,
for automated indicator computation.

> ## Integrating with OpenHIM (Middleware component)

Reviewer: Suggestion: Move this whole section about OpenHIM to a separate .md file under `docs/`

Author: Will do in separate PR.

For the case, where there are several OpenMRS systems, OpenHIM can be used as a

> middleware component to integrate/track/log requests from several OpenMRS

Reviewer: This statement is a little bit misleading or I don't fully understand it. I would simply reword this as:

"_The generated FHIR resources can be sent to a middleware like OpenHIM._"

and avoid the topic of multiple OpenMRS instances altogether. Adding @mozzy11 to make sure my suggestion is okay with his intended use-case.

Author: Sorry, I should have specified that I only edited the content of the pipeline sections. Happy to update if @mozzy11 confirms the correction in this PR or as a follow-up during the file splits.

Reviewer: Sounds good; let's address these changes when we split this and create a separate doc for the OpenHIM case.

instances.

### 1. Fire up OpenHIM Instance

After spinning up the Hapi FHIR instance, see details above, you can spin up an
OpenHIM instance.

```
`$ docker-compose -f openhim-compose.yaml up # change ports appropriately (optional)`
```

You should be able to access OpenHIM via http://localhost:9000 Use the default
credentials i.e

```
`username : root@openhim.org and password : openhim-password`
```

Note: You will have problems logging in if your OpenHIM server is still setup to
use a self-signed certificate (the default). Visit the following link:

> https://localhost:8093/authenticate/root@openhim.org in Chrome.

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
https://localhost:8093/authenticate/root@openhim.org in your browser.
```

You should see a message saying “Your connection is not private”. Click
“Advanced” and then click “Proceed”.

Once you have done this, you should see some JSON text displayed on the screen,
you can ignore this and close the page. This will ignore the fact that the
certificate is self-signed.

Now, you should be able to go back to the OpenHIM console login page and login.
This problem will occur every now and then until you load a properly signed
certificate into the OpenHIM core server.

> For the first Login .youll be requested to change your root password!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the first Login you will be requested to change your root password!
```

Then Go to the 'Export/Import' tab and import the default config file under
`Utils/openhim-config.json` for a basic configuration.

> NB the default configurations have the following default configs:

Reviewer: I am not sure what NB refers to here but let's leave it as is (after you move this content to a separate file).

Author: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nota_bene though I'd probably just change this to "Note" once I review this section properly. :)

For the Client :

```
`client : hapi` , `client-password : Admin123`
```

For the server to route to :

```
`Host: 172.17.0.1` (Docker Bridge Ip address), `Port: 8098` (Port for the Hapi fhir server) .
```

see section *Using Docker compose* to fire up the Hapi fhir server and openmrs.
\
Note that Openhim listens to client requests at `port:5001` by default.

> you can now start the pipeline with these args below to point to the OpenHIm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now start the pipeline with these args below to point to the OpenHIM
```

instance

```
`--sinkUserName=hapi --sinkPassword=Admin123 --fhirSinkPath=http://localhost:5001/fhir`
```

> ie

Reviewer: ```suggestion
i.e.,
```

Author: I think this is actually an e.g. :)

for batch

```
mvn compile exec:java -pl batch \
    "-Dexec.args=--openmrsServerUrl=http://localhost:8099/openmrs  --searchList=Patient \
    --batchSize=20 --targetParallelism=20  \
    --fhirSinkPath=http://localhost:5001/fhir \
    --sinkUserName=hapi --sinkPassword=Admin123 \
    --openmrsUserName=admin --openmrsPassword=Admin123 "
```

for streaming

```
mvn compile exec:java -pl streaming-binlog \
  -Dexec.args="--databaseHostName=localhost \
  --databasePort=3306 --databaseUser=root --databasePassword=debezium\
  --databaseName=mysql --databaseSchema=openmrs --databaseServerId=77 \
  --openmrsUserName=admin --openmrsPassword=Admin123 \
  --openmrsServerUrl=http://localhost:8099/openmrs \
  --fhirSinkPath=http://localhost:5001/fhir \
  --sinkUserName=hapi --sinkPassword=Admin123 \
  --fileParquetPath=/tmp/"
```

You can track all the transactions in the OpenHIM instance Under the Tab
`Transaction Log`

> see demo at https://youtu.be/U1Sz3GUKbIw

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See a demo at https://youtu.be/U1Sz3GUKbIw
```

> see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See
```

> https://openhim.readthedocs.io/en/latest/how-to/how-to-setup-and-configure-openhim.html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[here](https://openhim.readthedocs.io/en/latest/how-to/how-to-setup-and-configure-openhim.html)
```

for more details about setting up OpenHIM

> ## Running end-to-end tests

Reviewer: And let's the next two sections to two other separate .md files under `docs/`.

Author: Will do in follow-up PR.
